Adds a new example about documents using shared models (#163)
jupyterlab/extension-examples: documents/README.md

# Documents

> Create new documents and make them collaborative.

![Documents example](./preview.gif)

> ⚠ **This example only works on JupyterLab v3.1 or higher**

> > Before starting this guide, we strongly recommend to look at the documentation, precisely the section of [Documents](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/stable/extension/documents.html#documents)

Reviewer: Please use passive form or _you_ in the text; don't use _we_.

- [Documents](#documents)
  - [Introduction to documents](#introduction-to-documents)
  - [Factories](#factories)
  - [Registering new Documents](#registering-new-documents)
  - [Document Widget](#document-widget)
  - [Document Model](#document-model)
  - [Shared Model](#shared-model)

## Introduction to documents

In JupyterLab, we refer to a document to those widgets backed by a file stored on disk. These files are represented in the frontend by a `Context` which is the bridge between the file and its model, `DocumentModel` representing the data in the file and `DocumentWidget`, which is the view of the model. To make the documents API extensible to enable other developers to write new extensions to support different file types, JupyterLab introduces the `DocumentRegistry` to register new `FileType`s, `DocumentModel`s and `DocumentWidget`s. This way, when opening a new file, the `DocumentManager` will look into the file metadata and create an instance of `Context` with the right `DocumentModel` for this file. To register new documents, you can create factories, either a `ModelFactory` for the model or a `WidgetFactory` for the view.

## Factories

> Factories are objects meant to create instances of the suitable Widget/Model given a file. For example, when the `DocumentManager` detects that the file is a notebook, it uses the notebook widget factory to create a new instance of `NotebookPanel`. On the other hand, if you want to make a new `DocumentModel` or `DocumentWidget` for a specific file type, you have to create a factory and register it to the `DocumentRegister`. When registering a factory, you tell the `DocumentManager` that you added a new Model or Widget for a specific file. Then, the `DocumentManager` will use those factories to create instances of the new `DocumentModel` or `DocumentWidget`.

Reviewer: Format should be consistent, if you use write you refer a code class name, the word should match the code and be formatted with <code>`</code>. Otherwise use lower case and if you want to emphase a word use _italic_ format.

> This remark is mainly for _widget_ and _model_ word.

The easiest way of creating a new widget factory is extending from the `ABCWidgetFactory<T, U>` and overwrite its method `createNewWidget`. The `DocumentManager` calls `createNewWidget` to create a new widget for a given file. This method receives as an argument the context which includes the model. In this method, you can create and pass as an argument all the objects your `DocumentWidget` needs. Usually, the `DocumentWidget` needs context and the content. The content is the main view of the `DocumentWidget` (you can find more information on the section for the [Document Widget](#document-widget)).

```ts
// src/factory.ts#L32-L40

  protected createNewWidget(
    context: DocumentRegistry.IContext<ExampleDocModel>
  ): ExampleDocWidget {
    return new ExampleDocWidget({
      context,
      content: new ExamplePanel(context)
    });
  }
}
```

On the other hand, to create a `ModelFactory`, you need to implement the interface `IModelFactory<T>` specifying the name of your model, which type of files represents and its format.

```ts

> // src/factory.ts#L48-L67

Reviewer: Code is missing

```

At the same time, you need to implement the method `createNew`. The `DocumentManager` will call this method when opening a file that uses your custom `DocumentModel`.

```ts

> // src/factory.ts#L92-L101

Reviewer: Code is missing

```

## Registering new Documents

> When registering a new document, the first step is to know which file type you want to add a new `DocumentModel`. If the file type is already registered, you won't need to register it again. You could register a new `DocumentModel` for an existing file type. If the file type you want to support is not registered, you will need to register it. To do that, you can use the API `addFileType` from the `DocumentRegistry`. The essential arguments are `extensions` to indicate the extension of the file, `fileFormat` that specifies the data format, and `contentType` to determine if it is a notebook, file or directory.

Reviewer: ```
When registering a new document, the first step is to know which file type you want to add a new `DocumentModel`.
```

This does not sound as proper English.

```ts
// src/index.ts#L73-L81

// register the filetype
app.docRegistry.addFileType({
  name: 'example',
  displayName: 'Example',
  mimeTypes: ['text/json', 'application/json'],
  extensions: ['.example'],
  fileFormat: 'text',
  contentType: 'file'
});
```

> Once the file type is registered, you can register a `DocumentModel` for a specific file type. The `DocumentModel` represent the content of the file. For example, JupyterLab has two models registered for the notebook. When you open a notebook with the Notebook editor, the `DocumentManager` creates an instance of the `NotebookModel` that loads the notebook as a JSON object and offers a complex API to manage cells and metadata independently (treats the content of the notebook as a structured data), opposite when opening a notebook with the plain text editor the `DocumentManager` creates an instance of the base `DocumentModel` class which treats the content of the notebook as a string. Note that you can register multiple models for the same file type. Still, these models are not in sync when the user opens two editors for the same file that use different models (like opening a notebook with the notebook editor and the plain text editor). These editors are not in sync because they use other models. At some point, they will show different content.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the file type is registered, you can register a `DocumentModel` for a specific file type. The `DocumentModel` represents the content of the file. For example, JupyterLab has two models registered for the notebook. When you open a notebook with the Notebook editor, the `DocumentManager` creates an instance of the `NotebookModel` that loads the notebook as a JSON object and offers a complex API to manage cells and metadata independently (treats the content of the notebook as a structured data). When opening a notebook with the plain text editor the `DocumentManager` creates an instance of the base `DocumentModel` class which treats the content of the notebook as a string. Note that you can register multiple models for the same file type. Still, these models are not in sync when the user opens two editors for the same file that use different models (like opening a notebook with the notebook editor and the plain text editor). These editors are not in sync because they use different models. At some point, they will show different content.
```

To register a new `DocumentModel` we can use the API `addModelFactory` from the `DocumentRegistry`. In this case, we created the model factory without arguments, but you can add the argument that you need.

```ts
// src/index.ts#L70-L71

const modelFactory = new ExampleDocModelFactory();
app.docRegistry.addModelFactory(modelFactory);
```

> The last step is to register the `DocumentWidget`, as with the `DocumentModel`, you can register a widget for an existing model or a new model if the existing ones fit your needs. In this case, different widgets using the same model will stay in sync. The `DocumentWidget` is the view for the model, and it's only the layer that allows users to interact with the content of the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last step is to register the `DocumentWidget`. As with the `DocumentModel`, you can register a widget for an existing model or a new model if the existing ones fit your needs. In this case, different widgets using the same model will stay in sync. The `DocumentWidget` is the view for the model, and it is only the layer that allows users to interact with the content of the file.
```

To sync content between clients, Yjs uses providers. Providers abstract Yjs from the network technology your application uses. They sync Yjs documents through a communication protocol or a database. Most providers have in common that they use the concept of room names to connect Yjs documents. In JupyterLab, we created a package called `@jupyterlab/docprovider` with a WebSocket provider that syncs documents through a new end-point (`api/yjs`) in the JupyterLab server.

Another critical component of Yjs is Awareness. Every Yjs document has an `awareness` attribute that enables you to share user's information like its name, cursor, mouse pointer position, etc. The `awareness` attribute doesn't persist across sessions. Instead, Yjs uses a tiny state-based Awareness CRDT that propagates JSON objects to all users. When you go offline, your awareness state is automatically deleted and notifies all users that you went offline.

> After a short explanation of Yjs' features, now it's time to start with the implementation. You can create a new shared model by extending from `YDocument<T>`. [YDocument](https://github.com/jupyterlab/jupyterlab/blob/46e2b9bc4659c0529d32678004fc59ec3e39f0e6/packages/shared-models/src/ymodels.ts#L28) is a generic implementation of a shared model that handles the initialization of the `YDoc` and already implements some functionalities like the changes history.

Reviewer: Now that 3.1 is released, it is better to point to the API documentation:

```suggestion
After a short explanation of Yjs' features, now it's time to start with the implementation. You can create a new shared model by extending from `YDocument<T>`. [YDocument](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/classes/shared_models.ydocument.html) is a generic implementation of a shared model that handles the initialization of the `YDoc` and already implements some functionalities like the changes history.
```

- `title`: Which handles the content of the tab.
- `toolbar`: The editor's toolbar, where you can add different widgets to trigger actions on the document.
- `contentHeader`: This is a panel between the toolbar and the main content area. You can see this header as a second toolbar or as a notification area.
- `content`: The content is the main area of the `DocumentWidget` when you add the view for your document.

## Document Model

The `DocumentModel` represents the file in the frontend. Through the model, you can listen to changes in the state of the file like its metadata or some other properties like `dirty` that indicates that the content differs from disk, and you can modify and listen to changes on the content. The main methods on the `DocumentModel` are `toString` and `fromString`, every file but the notebook is loaded/saved to disk as a string using these methods.

## Shared Model

> In JupyterLab v3.1, we introduced the package `@jupyterlab/shared-models` to swap `ModelDB` as a data storage to make the notebooks collaborative. We implemented these shared models using [Yjs](https://yjs.dev), a high-performance CRDT for building collaborative applications that automatically sync. You can find all the documentation of Yjs [here](https://docs.yjs.dev).

Reviewer 2: Wondering whether we should also have a small disclaimer at the very top of the file to mention this is for JupyterLab 3.1 only?

Author: That's a great idea
